Create OSSM Ambient tech-preview documentation (#344)
openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator: docs/ossm/ambient/README.md

# Getting Started with Istio Ambient Mode (Tech Preview)

> This section provides a high-level overview and installation procedure for Istio's ambient mode on OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) using OpenShift Service Mesh 3.

Author: Updated.

* The OpenShift Service Mesh operator is [installed](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_service_mesh/3.0/html/installing/ossm-installing-service-mesh#ossm-installing-operator_ossm-about-deploying-istio-using-service-mesh-operator).

### 3.2 Install Istio (Control Plane)

#### 3.2.1 Creating the Istio project using the web console

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Home** > **Projects**.
2.  Click **Create Project**.
3.  At the prompt, enter a name for the project in the **Name** field. For example, `istio-system`. The other fields provide supplementary information to the `Istio` resource definition and are optional.
4.  Click **Create**. The Service Mesh Operator deploys Istio to the project you specified.

#### 3.2.2 Creating the Istio resource using the web console

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

> 

Reviewer: These prerequisites are repeated for each of the steps. I think we can have a common pre-requisite section above that applies to all of them.

Author: Agree.

I'll restructure this.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Home** > **Projects**.
2.  Click **Create Project**.
3.  At the prompt, enter a name for the project in the **Name** field. For example, `istio-cni`. The other fields provide supplementary information to the `Istio` resource definition and are optional.
4.  Click **Create**. The Service Mesh Operator deploys Istio to the project you specified.

#### 3.3.2 Creating the Istio CNI resource using the web console

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Operators** > **Installed Operators**.
2.  Select `istio-cni` in the **Project** drop-down menu.
3.  Click the Service Mesh Operator.
4.  Click **IstioCNI**.
5.  Click **Create IstioCNI**.
6.  Ensure that the name is `default`.
7.  Select the `istio-cni` project from the **Namespace** drop-down menu.
8.  Click on the **Helm Values** -> **cni** -> **ambient** drop-down menu.
9.  Locate **enabled** parameter and mark the checkbox.

> 10. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Istio control plane.  

Author: Updated.

>     When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, Istio is successfully deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, it implies that Istio CNI is successfully deployed.
```

#### 3.3.3 Creating the Istio CNI resource using the CLI

TBD

### 3.4 Install Ztunnel proxy

#### 3.4.1 Creating the Ztunnel project using the web console

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Home** > **Projects**.
2.  Click **Create Project**.
3.  At the prompt, enter a name for the project in the **Name** field. For example, `ztunnel`. The other fields provide supplementary information to the `Istio` resource definition and are optional.  

>     **Note** - The namespace name for `ztunnel` project have to equal the `trustedZtunnelNamespace` parameter in **Istio** configuration.

Author: Updated.

4.  Click **Create**. The Service Mesh Operator deploys Istio to the project you specified.

#### 3.4.2 Creating the Ztunnel resource using the web console

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Operators** > **Installed Operators**.
2.  Select `ztunnel` in the **Project** drop-down menu.
3.  Click the Service Mesh Operator.
4.  Click **ZTunnel**.
5.  Click **Create ZTunnel**.
6.  Ensure that the name is `default`.
7.  Select the `ztunnel` project from the **Namespace** drop-down menu.

> 10. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Istio control plane.  

Author: Updated.

>     When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, Istio is successfully deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, it implies that Ztunnel is successfully deployed.
```

Author: Updated.

> #### 3.4.3 Creating the Istio CNI resource using the CLI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 3.4.3 Creating the Istio Ztunnel resource using the CLI
```

TBD

### 3.5 Scoping the Service Mesh with discovery selectors

Service Mesh in Istio ambient mode includes workloads that meet the following criteria:

* The control plane has discovered the workload.
* The workload has been [labelled appropriately](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/add-workloads/), such that traffic redirection with ZTunnel has been configured.

By default, the control plane discovers workloads in all namespaces across the cluster, with the following results:

* Each proxy instance receives configuration for all namespaces, including workloads not enrolled in the mesh.

> * Any workload with the appropriate pod or namespace injection label receives a proxy sidecar. 

Reviewer: Since the "sidecar" is not used with Ambient, may be we can rephrase this as follows.

* All the workloads with the appropriate labels would become part of the mesh.

Author: Updated.

The `discoverySelectors` field accepts an array of Kubernetes selectors, which apply to labels on namespaces. You can configure each selector for different use cases:

* Custom label names and values. For example, configure all namespaces with the label istio-discovery=enabled.
* A list of namespace labels by using set-based selectors with OR logic. For instance, configure namespaces with istio-discovery=enabled OR region=us-east1.
* Inclusion and exclusion of namespaces. For example, configure namespaces with istio-discovery=enabled AND the label app=helloworld.

#### 3.5.2 Scoping a Service Mesh by using discovery selectors

If you know which namespaces to include in the Service Mesh, configure `discoverySelectors` during or after installation by adding the required selectors to the `meshConfig.discoverySelectors` section of the `Istio` resource. For example, configure Istio to discover only namespaces labeled `istio-discovery=enabled`.

**Prerequisites**

* The OpenShift Service Mesh operator is installed.

> * An Istio CNI resource is created.

Reviewer: Why only "Istio CNI"? 

I think you missed including the Istiod and Ztunnel here.

Author: Updated.

**Procedure**

1. Add a label to the namespace containing the Istio control plane, for example, the `istio-system` system namespace.

```bash
$ oc label namespace istio-system istio-discovery=enabled
```

2. Add a label to the namespace containing the Ztunnel proxy, for example, the `ztunnel` namespace.

```bash
$ oc label namespace ztunnel istio-discovery=enabled

> ```

Reviewer: Similarly for Istio CNI ....

The `bookinfo` application is exposed through the mesh, and the mesh configuration determines how the microservices comprising the application are used to serve requests. The review information comes from one of three services: `reviews-v1`, `reviews-v2` or `reviews-v3`. If you deploy the `bookinfo` application without defining the `reviews` virtual service, then the mesh uses a round robin rule to route requests to a service.

By deploying the `reviews` virtual service, you can specify a different behavior. For example, you can specify that if a user logs into the `bookinfo` application, then the mesh routes requests to the `reviews-v2` service, and the application displays reviews with black stars. If a user does not log into the `bookinfo` application, then the mesh routes requests to the `reviews-v3` service, and the application displays reviews with red stars.

For more information, see [Bookinfo Application](https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/) in the upstream Istio documentation.

#### 3.6.1 Deploying the Bookinfo application

**Prerequisites**

> * You have deployed a cluster on OpenShift Container Platform 4.15 or later.

Reviewer: In Line 37, we have specified the pre-requisite as OCP 4.19+ Whereas here we are suggesting 4.15, lets be consistent.

```
**OpenShift Container Platform 4.19+:** This version of OpenShift is required for supported Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs, which are essential for ambient mode functionalities.
```

Author: Updated.

* **Incremental Adoption:** Allows for gradual adoption of service mesh features. Workloads can join the mesh at L4 for mTLS and basic policy, and then selectively opt-in for L7 features via `waypoint` proxies as needed.
* **Enhanced Security:** Provides a secure, zero-trust network foundation with mTLS by default for all meshed workloads.

**Trade-offs:**

* Ambient mode is a newer architecture and may have different operational considerations compared to the traditional sidecar model.
* L7 features require the deployment of `waypoint` proxies, which add a small amount of overhead for the services that utilize them.

---

## 2. Pre-requisites to Using Ambient Mode with OSSM 3

Before installing Istio's ambient mode with OpenShift Service Mesh, ensure the following prerequisites are met:

* **OpenShift Container Platform 4.19+:** This version of OpenShift is required for supported Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs, which are essential for ambient mode functionalities.
* **OpenShift Service Mesh 3.1.0+ operator is installed:** Ensure that the OSSM operator version 3.1.0 or later is installed on your OpenShift cluster.

**Coexistence with Sidecar-based OSSM 3:**

> While it is technically possible for a sidecar version of OSSM to exist on the same cluster, for a seamless tech preview experience and to avoid potential conflicts, it is **highly recommended** to use a clean OpenShift cluster without any pre-existing OSSM installations (especially 2.6 or earlier) when setting up ambient mode. This ensures a dedicated environment for testing the new architecture.

Reviewer 2: Would it be possible if they were isolated using discovery selectors? I am guessing we haven't tested that scenario yet.... we'll want to before GA. For now, I think we should be a bit more precise with this warning. Maybe something like: 

>Pre-existing Service Mesh Installations
>
>While the use of properly defined discovery selectors will allow a service mesh to be deployed in ambient mode alongside a service mesh in sidecar mode, this is not a scenario we have thoroughly validated. To avoid potential conflicts, as a technology preview feature, Istio's ambient mode should only be installed on clusters without a pre-existing OpenShift Service Mesh installation. 
>
> Note: Istio's ambient mode is completely incompatible with clusters containing the OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 or earlier versions of the operator and they should not be used together.

---

## 3. Procedure to Install Istio's Ambient Mode

> This procedure demonstrates how to install Istio's ambient mode on OpenShift and integrate the Bookinfo application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This procedure demonstrates how to install Istio's ambient mode on OpenShift with Istio's sample Bookinfo application.
```

### 3.1 Prerequisites

* You have deployed a cluster on OpenShift Container Platform 4.19 or later.
* You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform we console as a user with the cluster-admin role.

> ### 3.2 Install Service Mesh 3 Operator

Author: Updated.

7.  Click on the **Helm Values** drop-down menu.
8.  Locate **profile** parameter and enter **ambient** as a value.
9.  Locate and click on **pilot** drop-down menu under the **Helm Values**.
10. Locate **trustedZtunnelNamespace** parameter and enter **ztunnel** as a value.
11. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Istio control plane.  
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, Istio is successfully deployed.

#### 3.3.3 Creating the Istio resource using the CLI

TBD

### 3.4 Install Istio CNI

#### 3.4.1 Creating the Istio CNI project using the web console

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Home** > **Projects**.
2.  Click **Create Project**.
3.  At the prompt, enter a name for the project in the **Name** field. For example, `istio-cni`. The other fields provide supplementary information to the `Istio` resource definition and are optional.
4.  Click **Create**. The Service Mesh Operator deploys Istio to the project you specified.

> #### 3.4.2 Creating the Istio CNI resource using the web console

Reviewer 2: Thanks you - I suggest calling that out as an introduction to the procedure, and adding a small sentence describing what the IstioCNI does. Something like "The IstioCNI resource must be created (or modified if it already exists) to enable the ambient profile.  It is responsible for detecting the pods that belong to the ambient mesh, and configuring the traffic redirection between pods and the ztunnel node proxy (which will be installed next)." I copied the second sentence from the upstream docs.

8.  Click on the **Helm Values** -> **cni** -> **ambient** drop-down menu.
9.  Locate **enabled** parameter and mark the checkbox.
10. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Istio control plane.  
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, Istio is successfully deployed.

#### 3.4.3 Creating the Istio CNI resource using the CLI

TBD

### 3.5 Install Ztunnel proxy

#### 3.5.1 Creating the Ztunnel project using the web console

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Home** > **Projects**.
2.  Click **Create Project**.
3.  At the prompt, enter a name for the project in the **Name** field. For example, `ztunnel`. The other fields provide supplementary information to the `Istio` resource definition and are optional.  
    **Note** - The namespace name for `ztunnel` project have to equal the `trustedZtunnelNamespace` parameter in **Istio** configuration.
4.  Click **Create**. The Service Mesh Operator deploys Istio to the project you specified.

> #### 3.5.2 Creating the Istio CNI resource using the web console

Author: Fixed.

**Prerequisites**

1.  The Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh Operator must be installed.
2.  You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform web console as cluster-admin.

**Procedure**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Operators** > **Installed Operators**.
2.  Select `ztunnel` in the **Project** drop-down menu.
3.  Click the Service Mesh Operator.
4.  Click **ZTunnel**.
5.  Click **Create ZTunnel**.
6.  Ensure that the name is `default`.
7.  Select the `ztunnel` project from the **Namespace** drop-down menu.
10. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Istio control plane.  
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, Istio is successfully deployed.

#### 3.5.3 Creating the Istio CNI resource using the CLI

TBD

### 3.6 Scoping the Service Mesh with discovery selectors

> Service Mesh includes workloads that meet the following criteria:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Service Mesh in Istio ambient mode includes workloads that meet the following criteria:
```

Author: Updated.

* The control plane has discovered the workload.

> * The workload has an Envoy proxy sidecar injected.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is true for ambient mode :). I am not sure what the ambient equivalent wording should be, it is described [a bit here](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/add-workloads/). Maybe "The workload has been [labelled appropriately](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/add-workloads/), such that traffic redirection with ZTunnel has been configured." 

We will probably need a separate section of the product docs that covers this topic in depth for GA.

* Inclusion and exclusion of namespaces. For example, configure namespaces with istio-discovery=enabled AND the label app=helloworld.

#### 3.6.2 Scoping a Service Mesh by using discovery selectors

If you know which namespaces to include in the Service Mesh, configure `discoverySelectors` during or after installation by adding the required selectors to the `meshConfig.discoverySelectors` section of the `Istio` resource. For example, configure Istio to discover only namespaces labeled `istio-discovery=enabled`.

**Prerequisites**

* The OpenShift Service Mesh operator is installed.
* An Istio CNI resource is created.

**Procedure**

1. Add a label to the namespace containing the Istio control plane, for example, the `istio-system` system namespace.

```bash
$ oc label namespace istio-system istio-discovery=enabled
```

2. Add a label to the namespace containing the Ztunnel proxy, for example, the `ztunnel` namespace.

```bash
$ oc label namespace ztunnel istio-discovery=enabled
```

4. Modify the `Istio` control plane resource to include a `discoverySelectors` section with the same label.

```bash

> $ oc patch istio default --type=merge -p '{

Reviewer 2: I think the preference is usually to show an example configuration YAML that isolates the changes required - for example, in [step 2 here](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_service_mesh/3.0/html/installing/ossm-installing-service-mesh#ossm-installing-operator_ossm-about-deploying-istio-using-service-mesh-operator) - "Modify the `Istio` control plane..."... followed by the example config. It's easier to read if you use an editor.

Reviewer 2: If you want to point out the different parts of the resource you need to change, you could follow a model like step 3 in [this procedure](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_service_mesh/3.0/html/observability/metrics-and-service-mesh#ossm-config-openshift-monitoring-only_ossm-metrics), where there are numbers to point out which values are modified with a little explanation. That may be a bit more difficult to represent in Markdown, but we can do it in the product docs. cc @shreyasiddhartha may have a suggestion (not sure if that tag will work, but reach out to her on Slack if not). 

Also, I don't think you need to include parts of the configuration that are not relevant though - for example, the `updateStrategy` (good that you don't include `version`).

I general, I am just not a fan of more complex multi-line copy/paste syntax in docs, as they can be brittle to copy/paste and more difficult to debug if something changes later.

Author: Done.

### 1.2 Why Use Istio's Ambient Mode?

Istio's ambient mode offers several benefits:

* **Simplified Operations:** Eliminates the need for sidecar injection and management, reducing operational complexity and cognitive load.
* **Reduced Resource Consumption:** By centralizing mTLS and L4 policy enforcement in the `ztunnel`, ambient mode significantly lowers resource overhead per pod.
* **Incremental Adoption:** Allows for gradual adoption of service mesh features. Workloads can join the mesh at L4 for mTLS and basic policy, and then selectively opt-in for L7 features via `waypoint` proxies as needed.
* **Enhanced Security:** Provides a secure, zero-trust network foundation with mTLS by default for all meshed workloads.

**Trade-offs:**

* Ambient mode is a newer architecture and may have different operational considerations compared to the traditional sidecar model.
* L7 features require the deployment of `waypoint` proxies, which add a small amount of overhead for the services that utilize them.

---

## 2. Pre-requisites to Using Ambient Mode with OSSM 3

Before installing Istio's ambient mode with OpenShift Service Mesh, ensure the following prerequisites are met:

> * **OpenShift Container Platform 4.15+:** This version of OpenShift is required for supported Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs, which are essential for ambient mode functionalities.

Reviewer 2: I notice below we say that 4.19 is required. 4.19 will be the first version of OCP with supported Gateway API CRDs. Should this say 4.19?

Author: Hi @longmuir 

I had the following comment from @sridhargaddam 

> In Line 37, we have specified the pre-requisite as OCP 4.19+ Whereas here we are suggesting 4.15, lets be consistent.
```
**OpenShift Container Platform 4.19+:** This version of OpenShift is required for supported Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs, which are essential for ambient mode functionalities.
```

**Note**: Istio's ambient mode is completely incompatible with clusters containing the OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 or earlier versions of the operator and they should not be used together.

---

## 3. Procedure to Install Istio's Ambient Mode

This procedure demonstrates how to install Istio's ambient mode on OpenShift with Istio's sample Bookinfo application.

### 3.1 Prerequisites

* You have deployed a cluster on OpenShift Container Platform 4.19 or later.
* You are logged in to the OpenShift Container Platform either through the web console as a user with the cluster-admin role, or via the `oc login` command, depending on the installation method.
* The OpenShift Service Mesh operator is [installed](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_service_mesh/3.0/html/installing/ossm-installing-service-mesh#ossm-installing-operator_ossm-about-deploying-istio-using-service-mesh-operator).

### 3.2 Install Istio (Control Plane)

#### 3.2.1 Creating the Istio project

**Using the CLI**

1. Create a namespace for Istio. For example, `istio-system`.

```bash
$ oc create namespace istio-system
```

#### 3.2.2 Creating the Istio resource

**Using the CLI**

> 1. Create an Istio resource for creation.

Author: Updated.

```bash
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: Istio
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-system
  profile: ambient
  values:
    pilot:
      trustedZtunnelNamespace: ztunnel
```

2. Apply the Istio CR.

```bash
$ oc apply -f istio.yaml
```

3. Watch for the Istio control plane to become ready

```bash
$ oc wait --for=condition=Ready istios/default --timeout=3m
```

### 3.3 Install Istio CNI

#### 3.3.1 Creating the Istio CNI project

**Using the CLI**

> 1. Create a namespace for Istio. For example, `istio-cni`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a namespace for the Istio CNI. For example, `istio-cni`.
```

Author: Updated.

```bash
$ oc create namespace istio-cni
```

#### 3.3.2 Creating the Istio CNI resource

The IstioCNI resource must be created (or modified if it already exists) to enable the ambient profile. It is responsible for detecting the pods that belong to the ambient mesh, and configuring the traffic redirection between pods and the ztunnel node proxy (which will be installed next).

**Using the CLI**

1. Create an IstioCNI resource for creation.

```bash
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-cni
  profile: ambient
```

2. Apply the IstioCNI CR.

```bash
$ oc apply -f istio-cni.yaml
```

3. Watch for the IstioCNI pods to become ready

```bash
$ oc wait --for=condition=Ready istiocnis/default --timeout=3m
```

### 3.4 Install Ztunnel proxy

#### 3.4.1 Creating the Ztunnel project

**Using the CLI**

> 1. Create a namespace for Ztunnel. For example, `ztunnel`.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a namespace for the Ztunnel proxies. `ztunnel` is used in this example.  
```

Author: Updated.

   **Note** - The namespace name for `ztunnel` project must match the `trustedZtunnelNamespace` parameter in **Istio** configuration.

```bash
$ oc create namespace ztunnel
```

#### 3.4.2 Creating the Ztunnel resource

**Using the CLI**

> 1. Create an Ztunnel resource for creation.

Author: Updated.

```bash
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
kind: ZTunnel
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: ztunnel
  profile: ambient
```

2. Apply the Ztunnel CR.

```bash
$ oc apply -f ztunnel.yaml
```

> 3. Watch for the Ztunnel pods to become ready

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Watch for the Ztunnel pods to become ready.
```

Author: Updated.

```bash
$ oc apply -n bookinfo -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.25/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml
$ oc apply -n bookinfo -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.25/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo-versions.yaml
```

3. Verify that the `bookinfo` pods are available.

```bash
$ oc -n bookinfo get pods
```

**Example output**
```bash
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
details-v1-54ffdd5947-8gk5h      1/1     Running   0          5m9s
productpage-v1-d49bb79b4-cb9sl   1/1     Running   0          5m3s
ratings-v1-856f65bcff-h6kkf      1/1     Running   0          5m7s
reviews-v1-848b8749df-wl5br      1/1     Running   0          5m6s
reviews-v2-5fdf9886c7-8xprg      1/1     Running   0          5m5s
reviews-v3-bb6b8ddc7-bvcm5       1/1     Running   0          5m5s
```

4. Verify that the `bookinfo` application is running by sending a request to the `bookinfo` page. Run the following command:

```bash
oc exec "$(oc get pod -l app=ratings -n bookinfo -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -c ratings -n bookinfo -- curl -sS productpage:9080/productpage | grep -o "<title>.*</title>"
```

> 5. Add `bookinfo` application to the Ambient mesh.

Author: Updated.

istio-cni    istio-cni-node-7hwd2           10.0.61.108  ip-10-0-61-108.ec2.internal None     TCP
istio-cni    istio-cni-node-bfqmb           10.0.30.129  ip-10-0-30-129.ec2.internal None     TCP
istio-cni    istio-cni-node-cv8cw           10.0.75.71   ip-10-0-75-71.ec2.internal  None     TCP
istio-cni    istio-cni-node-hj9cz           10.0.47.239  ip-10-0-47-239.ec2.internal None     TCP
istio-cni    istio-cni-node-p8wrg           10.0.24.198  ip-10-0-24-198.ec2.internal None     TCP
istio-system istiod-6bd6b8664b-r74js        10.131.0.80  ip-10-0-47-239.ec2.internal None     TCP
ztunnel      ztunnel-2w5mj                  10.128.2.61  ip-10-0-24-198.ec2.internal None     TCP
ztunnel      ztunnel-6njq8                  10.129.0.131 ip-10-0-75-71.ec2.internal  None     TCP
ztunnel      ztunnel-96j7k                  10.130.0.146 ip-10-0-61-108.ec2.internal None     TCP
ztunnel      ztunnel-98mrk                  10.131.0.50  ip-10-0-47-239.ec2.internal None     TCP
ztunnel      ztunnel-jqcxn                  10.128.0.98  ip-10-0-30-129.ec2.internal None     TCP
```

---

## 4. Additional Resource Links

> * **Ambient mode architecture:** [https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Ambient mode architecture:** [https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/)
* **Adding workloads to a mesh in ambient mode:** [https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/add-workloads/](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/add-workloads/)
```

Author: Updated.

```

#### 3.2.2 Creating the Istio resource

**Using the web console**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Operators** > **Installed Operators**.
2.  Select `istio-system` in the **Project** drop-down menu.
3.  Click the Service Mesh Operator.
4.  Click **Istio**.
5.  Click **Create Istio**.
6.  Select the `istio-system` project from the **Namespace** drop-down menu.
7.  Click on the **Helm Values** drop-down menu.
8.  Locate **profile** parameter and enter **ambient** as a value.
9.  Locate and click on **pilot** drop-down menu under the **Helm Values**.
10. Locate **trustedZtunnelNamespace** parameter and enter **ztunnel** as a value.
11. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Istio control plane.  
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, Istio is successfully deployed.

**Using the CLI**

1. Create an Istio resource for creation.

```bash
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: Istio
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-system
  updateStrategy:
    type: InPlace
    inactiveRevisionDeletionGracePeriodSeconds: 30
  values:
    pilot:
      trustedZtunnelNamespace: ztunnel
    profile: ambient

>   version: v1.26.0

Reviewer 2: +1 We should remove any configuration that's not needed in the examples (same with `upgradeStrategy`)

>   version: v1.26.0

Author: Done.

```

2. Apply the Istio CR.

```bash
oc apply -f istio.yaml
```

> 3. Watch for the Istio pod to become ready

Author: Done.

```bash

> oc -n istio-system get pods

Author: Done.

4.  Click **Create**. The Service Mesh Operator deploys Istio to the project you specified.

**Using the CLI**

1. Create a namespace for Istio. For example, `istio-cni`.

```bash
$ oc create namespace istio-cni
```

#### 3.3.2 Creating the Istio CNI resource

**Using the web console**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Operators** > **Installed Operators**.
2.  Select `istio-cni` in the **Project** drop-down menu.
3.  Click the Service Mesh Operator.
4.  Click **IstioCNI**.
5.  Click **Create IstioCNI**.
6.  Ensure that the name is `default`.
7.  Select the `istio-cni` project from the **Namespace** drop-down menu.
8.  Click on the **Helm Values** -> **cni** -> **ambient** drop-down menu.
9.  Locate **enabled** parameter and mark the checkbox.
10. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Istio CNI plugin.  
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, it implies that Istio CNI is successfully deployed.

**Using the CLI**

1. Create an IstioCNI resource for creation.

```bash
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-cni
  values:

>     cni:

Author: Hi @sridhargaddam 

After additional check for this, I see that direct configuration of `profile: ambient` is not applied and not shown after that in the running resource, while the "cni.ambient.enabled: true" does.

Take a look at both manifests.
The annotation will should what have been applied and the actual state of the resource:

```
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
metadata:
  annotations:
    kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
      {"apiVersion":"sailoperator.io/v1","kind":"IstioCNI","metadata":{"annotations":{},"name":"default"},"spec":{"namespace":"istio-cni","values":{"profile":"ambient"}}}
  creationTimestamp: "2025-06-09T13:49:15Z"
  finalizers:
  - sailoperator.io/sail-operator
  generation: 1
  name: default
  resourceVersion: "75543"
  uid: 090afb6c-1ab9-418c-a41e-406c100476f2
spec:
  namespace: istio-cni
  values: {}
  version: v1.24.5
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-06-09T13:49:16Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Reconciled
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-06-09T13:49:25Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Ready
  observedGeneration: 1
  state: Healthy
```

```
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
metadata:
  annotations:
    kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
      {"apiVersion":"sailoperator.io/v1","kind":"IstioCNI","metadata":{"annotations":{},"name":"default"},"spec":{"namespace":"istio-cni","values":{"cni":{"ambient":{"enabled":true}}}}}
  creationTimestamp: "2025-06-09T13:53:51Z"
  finalizers:
  - sailoperator.io/sail-operator
  generation: 1
  name: default
  resourceVersion: "77049"
  uid: b0b60d04-33a3-461b-b8ab-ac29af85074b
spec:
  namespace: istio-cni
  values:
    cni:
      ambient:
        enabled: true
  version: v1.24.5
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-06-09T13:53:52Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Reconciled
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-06-09T13:53:56Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Ready
  observedGeneration: 1
  state: Healthy
```

So, it looks like the proper way is to apply the ambient profile vie the "cni.ambient.enabled: true" parameter.

>     cni:

Reviewer: @MaxBab, If specifying profile in browser is not working, then IMO its a bug which needs a fix.
Can you check if the manifests generated when using `--set profile: ambient` is matching with the manifests generated with `--set Values.cni.ambient.enabled: true`. You can use the command, "istioctl manifest generate ..."

If manifests are the same, then we can use it as a temporary solution, but if not, we need to properly fix the GUI.

>     cni:

Author: @sridhargaddam 

I forgot to mention.
The manifests examples above, are cli based manifests.
The first was applied with:
```
spec:
  proflie: ambient
```
But the profile field is not shown in the created resource.
It should, as I expect.

The second was applied with:
```
spec:
  values:
    cni:
      ambient:
        enabled: true
```
And later it's shown in the created resource.

Regarding the generated manifests:
When the manifests are generated by using `--set ambient` profile, it creates resources like ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding for `istio-cni-ambient` and sets ambient parameters, like `AMBIENT_DNS_CAPTURE: "false",
AMBIENT_ENABLED: "true", AMBIENT_IPV6: "true"` under `istio-cni-config` configmap, `PILOT_ENABLE_AMBIENT=true` env var for istiod deployment and the following config under the `istio-sidecar-injector` config map:

```
      "pilot": {
        "cni": {
          "ambient": {
            "enabled": true
          },
          "enabled": true,
          "provider": "default"
        }
      },
```

So it looks good.

On the other side, when generating the templates by using the `--set values.cni.ambient.enabled=true` parameter, the only ambient related configuration that appears within the templates is a `istio-sidecar-injector` config map:

```
      "pilot": {
        "cni": {
          "ambient": {
            "enabled": true
          },
          "enabled": true,
          "provider": "default"
        }
      },
```

So, we could summarize it into the following key notes.
* The "--set profile=ambient" argument should be used to fully enabled ambient profile.
* Need to add the `profile` field to the GUI.
* Need to make sure that once `spec.profile: ambient` is used in `IstioCNI`, it should appear later in the resource output.

**Note** - all the above relevant for the IstioCNI resource.
**Istio** resource has the `profile` field and shows the applied ambient profile as expected.

      ambient:
        enabled: true

>   version: v1.26.0

Author: Done.

4.  Click **Create**. The Service Mesh Operator deploys Istio to the project you specified.

**Using the CLI**

1. Create a namespace for Ztunnel. For example, `ztunnel`.  
   **Note** - The namespace name for `ztunnel` project must match the `trustedZtunnelNamespace` parameter in **Istio** configuration.

```bash
$ oc create namespace ztunnel
```

#### 3.4.2 Creating the Ztunnel resource

**Using the web console**

1.  In the OpenShift Container Platform web console, click **Operators** > **Installed Operators**.
2.  Select `ztunnel` in the **Project** drop-down menu.
3.  Click the Service Mesh Operator.
4.  Click **ZTunnel**.
5.  Click **Create ZTunnel**.
6.  Ensure that the name is `default`.
7.  Select the `ztunnel` project from the **Namespace** drop-down menu.
8. Click **Create**. This action deploys the Ztunnel component.  
    When `State: Healthy` appears in the **Status** column, it implies that Ztunnel is successfully deployed.

**Using the CLI**

1. Create an Ztunnel resource for creation.

```bash
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
kind: ZTunnel
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: ztunnel
  profile: ambient

>   version: v1.26.0

Author: Done.
